Hey guys, welcome back to the course. Now that
we've got the Google Analytics tracking code installed
on our site, we should start seeing
some data rolling in eventually.
Since there is no Carl and sadly, there are no creampuffs,
I'll show you what Google Analytics
looks like with one of my projects.
I'll give you a basic overview of the different sections
before we dig into the concepts of goal setting
and origin sorting in the next two lectures.
Now, for those of you who skipped the last video,
you may already be familiar with the layout of Google
Analytics and you're probably totally confused about
who Carl is and why I'm talking about creampuffs.
Well, don't worry about the creampuffs
and also feel free to skip this lecture.
Please do.
Now, if you've never seen Google Analytics and their
user interface before, well, brace yourself, because
you're going to see a lot of stuff and
it might be hard to take it all in.
You might even want to rewatch this afterwards
and make sure you've got the basics down.
Rest assured, though, we're going to go into a lot more
detail with Google Analytics later on in this course
when you actually have some data about people
coming in to your site. So let's see what it looks like.
OK.
So when we head over to analytics.google.com, again,
assuming we're logged in we have it set up, it will look like this.
Now, depending on when you guys are watching this,
this user interface could look different, because
they change it all the time for no reason,
but in general it's the same thought process,
and if they move it from one tab to another,
it just takes an extra 5 seconds to find it.
You'll see a list of all the projects where you have the
Google Analytics tracking code snippet installed.
If you're new to Google Analytics, you'll only see one
project, like the one we did last lecture for Carl's creampuffs.
We're going to check out the data for
my most recent project, 25 days of ideas.
This was just a fun video project I made around
Christmas and it was like an advent calendar counting
down to Christmas. For every single day
we had a video going over a way
to come up with business ideas.
Now, you can see up here that the date range
always is going to default to the past 30 days.
Then below you can see some high level data.
Yes, I am aware that I alternate between
data and data, I don't know why I do that.
You'll see things like number of sessions, which is how
many times the site loaded on someone's screen in
the past 30 days.
It counts it, if someone opens your site
twice, then it's going to count twice.
It's not about uniques. It's also going to show you things
like average session duration, which is how long people
stayed on the site during each session, bounce rate,
which is the percentage of people who loaded only one
page and then moved on to some
other website or closed the page.
One thing I'll note about bounce rate is that different
analytics tools will calculate this differently.
Google has a very specific way of doing it.
They generally look for people that only look at
one page and leave within a certain period of time,
so if they go to your page and
they're on there for 10 minutes,
but they didn't click through to anything
else, then it's not considered a bounce.
Then finally we have goal conversion rate, which is obviously
0%, because, well, I'm lazy and I never really set it up.
Now, goals can be set up to track how many
people, let's say, reach a certain page on your site.
They can be useful for tracking things like, I don't know,
how many sales you receive or how many people
sign up, and things like that.
We're actually going to go over it in the next lecture,
so it's actually really, really important, especially for
websites where you're selling something.
Now, we continue our tour and we click on "All website
data" to get to the meat of Google Analytics - and
brace yourself, because it's a little overwhelming at first.
Well, here goes nothing.
OK, so Google Analytics always dumps you right into
the Reporting tab into the Audience Overview section.
You can see Audience and then Overview in bold here.
The Audience section is where you go to learn more
about the people visiting your site.
Things like where they're located at, what languages
they speak, what type of technology they
use, as well as things like how often they visit your site
and what they do when they actually get there.
The first most obvious thing you'll see on the page
is this little squiggly graph. As you can see, it's
showing us the amount of sessions
per day for the past 30 days.
You can hover over different days to see
the number for that particular day.
You can see the same sessions number we saw in the
last screen. Then we can see Users, which is going
to be a lower number, because it's unique. That's because
there are some users with multiple sessions, meaning
they came to the website more than once in the past month.
Especially with this website, that was kind of the point,
I wanted people to keep coming back to it. After that,
we see Page Views, which is different than Sessions.
This is why it's important to have that tracking code
in the header of each page, because then Google
Analytics will track how many pages everyone
viewed across your entire website.
You notice this number is slightly higher than the
sessions number, and that's because some people viewed
more than one page, assuming you have more than one page.
Now, this leads us right into the next number, which
is Pages Per Session, which is just the number of
page views divided by the number of sessions.
Pretty straightforward.
Next step, we're going to look at Average Session Duration
and Bounce Rate, which are the same as the numbers we saw
on the opening screen.
Why are they listed twice? I don't know.
Then there's Percentage of New Sessions, meaning
of the people that came to your site within a given
period of time, how many of those people
have never seen your site before?
Now, this is an estimate, because Google isn't
perfectly able to track this, but in general it's decent.
For example, you can visit a site, then clear your
browsing history in cookies or switch browsers, then visit
the site again, and Google wouldn't know. One thing
that's very specific to Google is that they track with
cookies, and cookies can be cleaned.
If you're ever curious what a
number means in Google Analytics,
here's a quick pro tip.
Lots of times when you hover over things, Google will
actually pop up with something to tell you more about it.
Like, here we see it says Percentage of New Sessions
means, and it pops up, "An estimate of the percentage
of first time visits."
Well, there you go.
So, when in doubt, hover.
Now, that same percentage of new sessions
data is displayed in the pie chart.
Mmm, pie. Now, the pie chart is just a way of visualizing
the same information - depending on what you're trying
to figure out, different visualizations can help you
get there. Down below that, we can slice and dice
the data in different ways.
Like, for instance, language. You can see most of my
traffic comes from English speakers, which makes sense.
Next, we can check out country.
Not surprisingly, the U.S. is number one, because
apparently we're great at being America.
Then we can look at browser, Chrome here,
you can tell it's obviously in the lead.
And thank God Internet Explorer
is dying a slow and painful death.
And then for mobile users we can see what kind of
smartphone they're using, if they're using an iPhone
or an Android when they came
and looked at it. Aaand, holy ***!
Someone actually looked at my site on a Blackberry.
Apparently my site went back in time to 2006.
Now, all that information will be useful for figuring out who's
visiting your site and how best to serve them going forward.
If you have a ton of visitors who speak Spanish, well,
maybe it's a good idea to give them an option to change
the language on your site.
If most of your mobile traffic is coming from people
on Blackberries, then you should develop your site to
look good on the Blackberries.
And I would love to check out your time machine.
Okay, so I know that was a lot already, so I'm going
to briefly go over this stuff here on the side and
then we'll go into more details
in a couple of lectures from now.
So each one of these icons represents a different section.
You can click on them to expand and collapse them.
I'm going to do a quick rundown of each of them so you can
at least have a general idea of where things are. At the top
we have the dashboard. Now, this is where some people
first go to check on things, because they can create
different reports and display a bunch of them all in one
spot. By default, there are a bunch of pre-populated
charts and graphs, like New Users, Users, what
country people are in, and all sorts of other stuff.
These are customizable however you want.
The idea is to give you a high level overview of things
so you can see them all at once with a quick glance.
Next up, we have Shortcuts and Intelligence Events.
Now, I won't bother showing you these, because I
don't have either one set up and it's a little hardcore
for what we're trying to do, but the gist here is that you
can save any custom report you create as a shortcut
so you can easily find them again.
I'm not even sure what intelligence events are, but
by no means is it a reflection of my intelligence.
Basically, both of these are more advanced
features we don't need to get into right now.
Now, the next one down is Real Time. As its name implies,
this one shows what's going on in your website right now.
It can be fun to look at when you're getting decent
traffic, although not really sure how useful this
is at any given moment.
Google Analytics is most useful as a tool
for figuring out what happened in the past.
So you can use that information to make your
site and your marketing better in the future.
Google Analytics in general has a delay.
So a lot of times people will be on your site now,
they won't put that into your data
for at least 24 hours. Anyway,
let's go back to the audience overview, where we
started to check out some of the other things in the
Audience section. Over here on the side,
there are tons of other things, some of
which are more useful than others.
Many of them are just a deeper dive into the stuff
on the Overview page, but there's some interesting
stuff in here that could be useful, like
demographics, geography, behavior, etc.
Also, the Users Flow section is interesting.
It shows a visual of how different users
navigated through your website.
Click that dropdown menu and you can pick just about
whatever parameter you can imagine and it'll show them
as the first column and then show you where those
users are going on your site and where they were when
they left your site.
Now, that can potentially show you weak parts of
your site where people are routinely getting to and
then leaving. Maybe it's on the thank you page after
they placed an order, which would be great.
But maybe it's the checkout page, which could be an
indicator that there's some room to improve that page.
Next up is the Acquisition section, and this is where we'll see,
yep, you guessed it, where your traffic is coming from.
It'll show you how many people came through
various channels, like direct, social, referral,
and organic search.
Now, this is what we're most interested
in during this section of the course.
We'll be digging deeper into this part in just a bit.
Just stay tuned.
This is also the section where you go to see what users
you advertise to on Google AdWords are doing once
they land on your website, although I'm not doing that
at all for my website right this second. And there's
another section here for all the things social,
like Bookface and the big blue bloated bird.
Anyway, moving on down a bit, we see
on the side a section called Behavior.
Now, this is where you go to learn more about, not
surprisingly, how people behave on your site. Want to
figure out what your most popular blog post is? Go here.
Want to find the most popular search term people
typed into the search bar on your site?
Well, go here. Again,
here's another cool visualization
section called Behavior Flow.
Now, this one changes up the information a bit from
the one we saw in the Audience section of Google
Analytics. Instead of starting with something like
the country your users are in, this one starts with
things like what page people started on, which is more
commonly called a landing page, and then shows
you how the users that started on those individual
landing pages went through your site.
For example, here's where you would see some different
blog posts people landed on directly because they
saw them on Twitter or Facebook or something like that.
Well, what can people do on the blog post page?
They can just close it, which is called a bounce, like
we talked about earlier, or they could click over
to the home page to learn more about it,
what your site is all about,
or they could sign up for your e-mail list, or they
could click on a link in the article that leads to
another article, or any other number of things. This can help
you figure out where people are going throughout your site.
Now, last but not least is the Conversion section, and this is
where setting up goals for your site really comes into play.
But, like I mentioned at the very beginning, I never
set up goals for the 25 days of ideas, because I'm
a lazy bastard and I wasn't sure
what my goals would have been.
But, as I said then, goals can be really important for
figuring out what users are doing on your website
and can even help you find areas
where you can improve your site.
The next lecture is all about goals, how to set them
up, and what you can learn after they are set up.
Now, I know this lecture is a bit of a beast, especially if
you're unfamiliar with Google Analytics beforehand.
And we went through it really fast, but trust me, it will
all eventually make sense, especially with practice.
Google Analytics is definitely not meant to be pretty,
since Google is basically like your nerdy cousin
who still wears Velcro shoes as an adult, because they're,
you know, so much more efficient. Just start poking
around once you see some data coming into your site,
hover over stuff, and try to translate Google's nerdy
explanation for things or just, you know, post in
the Slack group, where the other resident
nerds are, and we can try to help you out.
Anyway, guys, moving on.
See you in the next lecture.